I am Steve Biko. Born in 1946 in King William’s
Town, South Africa. I am the founder of the Black
Consciousness Movement in South Africa.
My death from injuries suffered while
in police custody made me an international
martyr for South African Black nationalism.
After being expelled from high school for
political activism, I enrolled in and graduated
from St. Francis College, a liberal boarding
school in Natal, and then entered the University
of Natal Medical School. There, I became involved
in the multiracial National Union of South African
Students or NUSAS, a moderate organization
that had long espoused the rights of Blacks.
I soon grew disenchanted with NUSAS, believing
that, instead of simply allowing Blacks to
participate in white South African society, the
society itself needed to be restructured around
the culture of the Black majority. In 1968 I
co-founded the all-Black South African Students’
Organization and I became its first president
the following year. The organization was based
on the philosophy of Black consciousness, which
encouraged Blacks to recognize their inherent
dignity and self-worth. In the 1970s the Black
Consciousness Movement spread from university
campuses into urban Black communities throughout
South Africa. In 1972 I was one of the founders
of the Black People’s Convention, an umbrella
organization of Black consciousness groups.
I operated covertly, establishing the Zimele Trust
Fund in 1975 to help political prisoners and their
families. I was arrested and held without trial
for months numerous times. In 1977, I and a fellow
activist were seized at a roadblock and jailed
in Port Elizabeth. I was found naked and shackled
outside a hospital in Pretoria, 1,190 km away, and
died the next day of a massive brain hemorrhage.
Police initially denied any maltreatment
or involvement in my death. In 1997,
five former police officers confessed to having
killed me and applied for amnesty to the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission. It is better to
die for an idea that will live than to live for
an idea that will die. I pray black people can
live with dignity and pride all over the world.